Lastly to end this section on functions and function adjacent content we have kind of a quirk of JavaScript
something called hoisting.
It does have to do with functions but it's also not crucial.
It's not something that you need to stress about or worry about.
If you're having trouble understanding but I do need to show it to you.
So here we go.
What do you think happens if I have a variable I'll declare it with var first.
Var animal.
And I'll set it equal to what a good animal a tapir.
And then I control that log animal.
This probably is obvious.
Hopefully if I run this code it prints it out.
But what if I switch the order up.
What if I try and print animal first.
What do you expect to see I get undefined.
That may or may not have been what you expected but if I comment this out What do you expect to see.
Consider log animal.
It doesn't exist.
So we get an error.
Animal is not defined.
But when I declare it after the fact at this point animal should still be undeclared right.
I should still get this error but I don't.
It tells me undefined remember that variables.
When we declare them but don't initialize them.
For example var x and I don't give it a value X is set to undefined.
Now what's happening here that is leading to this weird behavior is called hoisting.
When javascript is interpreting the code what happens is that it hoists up I'm doing air quotes but
you can't see it.
It hoist up the variable declaration.
This part right here.
It doesn't actually move it in your code it doesn't reorganize your code but it runs this part first.
Var animal.
And then you can think of it as doing this after the fact.
So it starts with var animal.
So animal has a value of undefined.
Then we cancel that log animal which gives us undefined and then finally animal is set to taper.
So if I run this code we get undefined and then tapir.
But that wasn't the code we had written of course.
This was the code but we'll still get the same output undefined taper so this behavior is called hoisting
or JavaScript is going to see a var declaration.
It will run this first and then later will fill the value with taper.
Now this is an odd behavior.
It's probably not something you would ever want to happen if you're trying to print animal out.
You probably want animal to be defined and have a value so to avoid it you just want to make sure you're
always declaring your variables before you use them declaring and initializing them before you do anything
with them.
So that is var.
Now let's compare let in const can probably tell where I'm going with this.
Let's make a variable and instead of animal let's go with shrimp.
Shrimp will be set to Harlequin shrimp.
Very very pretty species of shrimp.
You can google that.
I wanted one as a pet for a long time until I learned the only food they eat is a starfish and they
keep a starfish alive and just keep eating its legs and then letting it regrow and eating more likes.
It's very very harsh reality for the starfish anyway.
If we console that lug shrimp here we probably expect to see Harlequin shrimp.
But if I do the same thing I did with the bar where I put the constant log first.
What happens we get something different.
It tells us reference error cannot access shrimp before initialization so variable declarations made
with light are not hoisted like they were with var declarations.
And that's one of the main reasons that we use.
Aside from block scope as well so it is very different than var two different ways of making variables.
But clearly they behave differently.
So when you declare variable let it's not hoisted.
We can not access it before we actually run this code before this variable exists which makes sense.
That's how the language should work right.
We wouldn't want that to happen if we are trying to console not like shrimp.
We expect shrimp to be a thing or we expect to get an error saying shrimp is not a thing unlike what
happened here where we could console that log animal before we actually gave it a value.
Javascript knew it existed even though we hadn't hit that line yet.
Which is weird it's bizarre.
Now if I do the same thing with const instead of let me get the same behavior.
So letting const are not hoisted.
Now this brings us to functions with functions.
We write a function declaration like function Howell which will console that log out something like
that.
If I call how after the fact.
Clearly it works.
We've done that a million times.
But if I call Howell before what do you think happened it still works.
So functions at least function declarations that we have here a function statement.
Those are hoisted.
You can think of them as being put at the top of your file so all the way up to the top.
Actually that's not actually happening.
It's just the javascript interpreter is running across these lines it's processing these lines first
so that we can call Howell which is also unexpected.
What's interesting is that if we instead write our function using a function expression so I'll declare
a variable I can use var or I could use it.
I'll do var let's do a function called Hoot and it will consider that.
Hoo hoo.
I'll call who down below.
We know that works.
If I try and call who first this time it doesn't work.
Why does not work.
We're using a different type of function.
This is a function expression.
These aren't hoisted although it's not entirely true.
The variable hoot does exist.
If I were to console that log who'd
it exists but it's not a function.
Whoops.
Get rid of those parents.
And now if I counted that log we get undefined.
It's the same thing we saw up here with animal.
This variable declaration is hoisted up javascript knows there's a variable called Hoot but it doesn't
know the value so it sets it to undefined.
So if I try and execute it with parentheses it's trying to call undefined which you can't do.
So the variable is hoisted.
The value is not.
And if I instead did let we get a different error with it because this variable declaration is not hoisted
just like shrimp poison or whatever we did for but that was not hoisted and because restoring this function
in the variable declared with it it's not hoisted at all.
So we get this error saying you cannot use that function before it's declared you can't access hoot
before it exists which makes sense.
You shouldn't be able to do that but you can with function declarations and when you use var so that's
hoisting.
It's not the highest stakes Super important thing that you have to understand before you move on but
it's kind of an interesting quirk of JavaScript and letting const exist to remedy some of these unexpected
consequences that would happen with var where you could write code that seems like it shouldn't work.
Maybe you wrote it in error and it didn't throw an error.
Instead it treated the variable as undefined and it could be confusing it can lead to issues so definitely
use the button concept but it's good to be aware of this weird hoisting thing.